---
title: House rules
layout: default
---

<div class="toc">

##### <a href="#internal-character">The Character</a>
<a href="#internal-AbilityScores">Ability Scores</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-Luck">Luck</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-Fatepoints">Fate points</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-Hitpoints">Hit points</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-Inspiration">Inspiration</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-AbilityChecks">Ability Checks</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-skills">Skills</a><br/>
<a href="herbalism.html">Herbalism</a><br/>
<a href="languages.html">Languages</a>

##### <a href="#internal-equipment">Equipment</a>
<a href="https://robertrigo.github.io/pages/equipment.html">Equipment list</a><br/>
<a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tqskfu5UBG7etSDtBf_WpMwHKTpOpwMvrQBXHLf36QM/pub">Alchemical and herbal items</a><br/>
<a href="../Equipment/armor.html">Armor</a><br/>
<a href="../Equipment/poisons.html">Poisons</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-Healingpotions">Healing potions</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-UsageDice">Usage Dice</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-Weapons">Weapons</a>

##### <a href="#internal-combat">Combat</a>
<a href="#internal-Surprise">Surprise</a>
<a href="#internal-Initiative">Initiative</a>
<a href="#internal-Movement">Movement</a>
<a href="#internal-ActionsinCombat">Actions in Combat</a>
<a href="#internal-Cover">Cover</a>
<a href="#internal-Resistances">Resistances</a>
<a href="#internal-Droppingto0hp">Dropping to 0 hp</a>
<a href="#internal-MountedCombat">Mounted Combat</a>
<a href="#internal-UnderwaterCombat">Underwater Combat</a>


##### <a href="#internal-magic">Spells and Magic</a>
[Prepared Spells](#p6)<br/>
[Casting Spells](#p6)<br/>
<a href="#internal-spell">Identifying a Spell</a><br/>
[Wild Magic](#p6)


##### <a href="#internal-adventuring">Adventuring</a>
<a href="#internal-rest">Resting</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-longRest">Additional Rest Activities</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-travel">Travel</a><br/>
<a href="#internal-water">Water rules</a>



</div>



## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-character">The Character</a>

The first step when playing is to create a character. All classes and folk can be found in the menu to the left.


### Ability Scores
Generate ability scores by rolling 4d6, and choosing three of them. After each roll, assign the score to one of your abilities. When you have rolled and assigned the first four ability scores you can choose to either continue rolling the last two as well, or assign an 8 and a 15 to the last ability scores.


### Luck
In addition to the six basic abilities, you also have a seventh, Luck. Your Luck is generated by rolling 3d6.


### Fate points
When you create your character, you will receive a Fate power which is powered by Fate points. If you start at level 1, you gain 2 Fate points, otherwise you start with 1. Whenever you gain an increase in your proficiency modifier, you also gain a Fate point.


### Hit points
You start first level with a hit point maximum equal to the highest roll of your hit die, modified by your Constitution modifier.

When you roll for hit points at higher levels, if you roll a 1 you may reroll the die and must use the new roll.


### Inspiration
You can hold up to 3 inspiration points at once. When making an ability check, you can spend a die *after* you see result to reroll. For other rolls, you have to spend the dice before the roll in order to gain advantage on the roll.

### <a class="internal-link" name="internal-checks">Ability Checks</a>
The three main rolls of the game — the ability check, the saving throw, and the attack roll — rely on your ability scores. Roll a d20, add an ability modifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and compare the total to a target number.

If you are proficient with the saving throw, a weapon you are attacking with or in an appropriate skill while making an ability check, you additionally add your proficiency bonus.

### <a class="internal-link" name="internal-traits">Skills</a>
Skills are described in a document found in the menu to the left. You will get skill points to select skills during character creation, as well as when you level up.

* During character creation, when rolling your background, you will get skills appropriate for the events in your life. If you get less than 3 skills (4 for humans), you can select additional skills so that you have 3. Additionally you always gain the appropriate Culture skill (unless living as a hermit or similar).

* Each class receives a number of skill points for which to buy skills from a list of class skills. Currently some classes have not yet been updated to this way of buying skills. In that case consult with your DM.

* Each time you level up, you gain 1 skill point, which you can use to buy any skill.

* In addition, classes may have class features that grant skills or skill points.

### Languages
Languages are learnt to different proficiency levels and this described on the <a href="http://homebrewery.naturalcrit.com/print/1wH0hMeVaeYe09alA-mrwmlll7x2JgUoyotKzIR4hutVi">Languages page</a>.









{{}}">wide
## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-equipment">Equipment</a>


When you create your character, you receive equipment and starting money based on a combination of your class and background. All equipment can be found on the <a href="https://robertrigo.github.io/pages/equipment.html">Equipment page</a>.

In addition there are dedicated pages for <a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tqskfu5UBG7etSDtBf_WpMwHKTpOpwMvrQBXHLf36QM/pub">alchemical and herbal items</a>, <a href="https://homebrewery.naturalcrit.com/print/1GEg-EfFkOaSNy20yrR1zt188H4mC9V52D3b0U32pegD8">armor</a>, <a href="https://homebrewery.naturalcrit.com/print/1uMKDk3FmuTgVZkRdGNlTRWdy_02ObK0h5MunQwzUUIj_">poisons</a> and <a href="https://homebrewery.naturalcrit.com/print/1G6nxn-gfMP80fmDbEDWDByn3eLFwweGwEgY09KHhiJlG">weapons</a>.


### Healing Potions
When you drink a healing potion, instead of rolling d4s to find how much hit points you regain,  roll your hit die. If you don't have a hit die value for any reason, roll a d4. Use this for all items that heals a number of d4s.

If you are multiclassed and have hit dice of varying sizes, use the hit die value of whichever class you have the most levels in. On a tie, use the highest.

### Usage Dice
Whenever you use a limited consumable (such as ammunition), you roll a usage die — if the roll is a 1 or 2 then the usage die shrinks one step. When you roll a 1 or 2 on a d4, the item is all used up.

d20 → d12 → d10 → d8 → d6 → d4 → 0

The larger the starting usage die, the more uses you'll get out of an item before it expires. The Usage Dice table shows the average number of times you can expect to roll a usage die before it's down to the very last use.




#### Usage Dice
| Starting Size | Average Uses | Starting Size | Average Uses |
|:-------------:|:------------:|:-------------:|:------------:|
| d20 | 30 | d8 | 9
| d12 | 20 | d6 | 5
| d10 | 14 | d4 | 2


#### Ammunition
Ammunition has a modified usage die.

d20 → d12 → d10 → d8 → d6 → d4 → 1

If you're down to one piece of ammunition and you use it, that's it — you've used the last piece, so remove the ammunition completely from your inventory.

Most ammunition types will usually start with (and have a maximum size of) a d12 ammunition die — this represents a full stack of arrows/bolts/bullets/etc.

#### Ammunition Stacks
If you're carrying multiple stacks of any one type of ammunition, prioritize the smallest stack first — always roll the smallest ammunition die per ammo type.

#### Special Ammo
If your ammunition is rare or has limited uses — fire arrows, magic bolts, lighting bullets, etc — don't use an ammunition die. Track each shot as you use them.

### Weapons
Every weapon belongs to a category, which decides its statistics. More information can be found on the <a href="https://homebrewery.naturalcrit.com/print/1G6nxn-gfMP80fmDbEDWDByn3eLFwweGwEgY09KHhiJlG">Weapon page</a>.






 {{}}">pageNumber,auto}}


{{}}">wide
## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-combat">Combat</a>


The game organizes the chaos of combat into a cycle of rounds and turns. A round represents about 6 seconds in the game world. During a round, each participant in a battle takes a
turn. The order of turns is determined at the beginning of a combat encounter, when everyone rolls initiative.


### Surprise
Any character or monster that doesn’t notice a threat is surprised at the start of the encounter. If you’re surprised, you can’t move or take an action on your first turn of the combat. Additionally you can’t take a reaction until you have acted.

#### Sneaking and Stabbing
Sneaking up to a guard and and knocking him out is fully possible. If you are undetected, make an attack roll with advantage. If you hit, and the target is Humanoid, it makes a Constitution save to avoid being knocked out. The difficulty of the save depends on whether the target has protection, like a helmet.

Rogues are alittle better at this, forcing the target to make their save sith disadvantage.


### Initiative
Reaction speed is determined first-and-foremost by your thoughts — the faster you can think, the faster your brain can tell your body to act. When rolling for initiative, do not add your Dexterity modifier — instead, add your **Intelligence** modifier. Break ties first with Dexterity, then Wisdom.


### Movement
Every character and monster has a speed, which is the distance in feet that the character or monster can move in 1 round. This number assumes short bursts of energetic movement in the midst of a lifethreatening situation.

Your movement can include jumping, flying and climbing, and you simply deduct the distance of each part of your move from your speed until it is used up or you are done moving.

Every foot of movement in **difficult terrain** costs 1 extra foot. The space of another creature, whether hostile or not, also counts as difficult terrain.

You can drop **prone** without using any of your speed. Standing up costs an amount of movement equal to half your speed. You can’t stand up if you don’t have enough movement left or if your speed is 0. To move while prone, you must crawl, which costs 1 extra foot. Crawling 1 foot in difficult terrain, therefore, costs 3 feet of movement.



***Long Jump***. A long jump covers a number of feet up to your Strength score if you move at least 10 feet on foot immediately before the jump. When making a standing long jump, you can leap only half that distance. When you land in difficult terrain, you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to land on your feet. Otherwise, you land prone.

***High Jump***.
When making a high jump, you leap a number of feet equal to 3 + your Strength modifier if you move at least 10 feet on foot immediately before the jump. When you make a standing high jump, you jump only half that distance.

You can extend your arms half your height above yourself during the jump. Thus, you can reach above you a distance equal to the height of the jump plus 1 1/2 times your height.


### Actions in Combat
On your turn, you can **move** a distance up to your speed, take one **action** and a **bonus action**. You can also **interact** with one object or feature of the environment for free, during either your move or your action.

The most common actions during combat is to attack. Other examples of actions you can take during combat are:
  ***Dash.*** You gain extra movement for the current turn equal your speed.

  ***Disengage.*** Your movement doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks for the rest of the turn.

  ***Dodge.*** Until the start of your next turn, any attack roll made against you has disadvantage if you can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity saving throws with advantage. You lose this benefit if you are incapacitated or if your speed drops to 0.

  ***Help.*** A creature you aid gains advantage on the next ability check it makes to perform the task you are helping with, provided that it makes the check before the start of your next turn. Alternatively, you can aid in attacking a creature within 5 feet of you. The first attack roll against it before your next turn is made with advantage.

  ***Ready.*** Prepare in order to use your action as a reaction, in response to a trigger that you decide. First, decide what perceivable circumstance will trigger your reaction. Then, choose the action you will take in response to that trigger. When the trigger occurs, you can either take your reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore the trigger.






  ***Ready a Spell.*** When you ready a spell, you cast it as normal but hold its energy, which you release with your reaction when the trigger occurs. To be readied, a spell must have a casting time of 1 action, and holding onto the spell’s magic requires concentration. If your concentration is broken, the spell dissipates without taking effect.

  ***Use an Object.*** Useful when you want to interact with more than one object on your turn.

### Cover
A target with ***half cover*** has a +2 bonus to AC and Dexterity saving throws. A target has half cover if an obstacle blocks at least half of its body. The obstacle might be a low wall, a large piece of furniture, a narrow tree trunk, or a creature, whether that creature is an enemy or a friend.

A target with ***three-quarters cover*** has a +5 bonus to AC and Dexterity saving throws. The obstacle might be an overturned table, an arrow slit, or a thick tree trunk.

A target with ***total cover*** can’t be targeted directly by an attack or a spell.

### Resistances
Resistance is applied after all other modifiers to damage. For example, a creature has resistance to bludgeoning damage and is hit by an attack that deals 25 bludgeoning damage. The creature is also within a magical aura that reduces all damage by 5. The 25 damage is first reduced by 5 and then halved, so the creature takes 10 damage.

Multiple instances of resistance that affect the same damage type count as only one instance. For example, if a creature has resistance to fire damage as well as resistance to all nonmagical damage, the damage of a nonmagical fire is reduced by half, not by three-quarters damage.


### Dropping to 0 hp
When damage reduces you to 0 hit points and there is damage remaining, you die if the remaining damage ***equals or exceeds your hit point maximum***.

If the remaining damage exceeds your Constitution score, your first Death save is made with disadvantage, and if it is below or equal to your Constitution bonus or 0, it is made with advantage.

You can use your action to administer first aid to an unconscious creature and attempt to ***stabilize*** it, which requires a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check. A stable creature that isn’t healed regains 1 hit point after 1d4 hours. However, it does benefit from spending a use from a ***Healer's kit*** if it has remaining hit dice.



After you regain hp to bring you above 0 hp it takes a few rounds to adjust; you get 6 levels of **combat exhaustion**. This is added to you normal exhaustion, but reaching level 6 (or higher) does not kill you, instead you count as **stunned**. You loose 1 level of combat exhaustion at the start of each of your rounds.


### Mounted Combat
Mounting or dismounting costs an amount of movement equal to half your speed. If an effect moves your mount against its will, you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or fall off, landing prone. If you’re knocked prone while mounted, you must make the same saving throw. If your mount is knocked prone, you can use your reaction to dismount it as it falls and land on your feet. Otherwise, you are dismounted and fall prone.

While mounted, you can either control the mount or allow it to act independently. You can control a mount only if it has been trained to accept a rider, in which case its initiative  changes to match yours. It moves as you direct it, and it has only three action options: Dash, Disengage and Dodge.

An independent mount retains its place in the initiative order. Bearing a rider puts no restrictions on the actions the mount can take, and it moves and acts as it wishes. It might flee from combat, rush to attack and devour a badly injured foe, or otherwise act against
your wishes. In either case, if the mount provokes an opportunity attack while you’re on it, the attacker can target you or the mount.


### Underwater Combat
***Melee weapon*** attacks have disadvantage on the attack roll unless the weapon deals piercing damage. ***Ranged weapon*** attacks automatically miss targets beyond the weapon’s normal range. Even against a target within normal range, the attack roll has disadvantage unless the weapon is a crossbow or a weapon that is thrown like a javelin (including a spear, trident or dart). Creatures and objects that are fully immersed in water have ***resistance to fire*** damage.





 {{}}">pageNumber,auto}}


{{}}">wide
## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-magic">Spells and Magic</a>

There are three kinds of magic:

  ***Arcane magic*** used by wizards, warlocks, sorcerers and bards, rely on an understanding — learned or intuitive — of the workings of the Weave that suffuses all existence.

  ***Divine magic*** is granted by the Gods to their most devoted followers, clerics and paladins.

  ***Primal magic*** which is provided by nature itself, or by ancestor spirits and filtered through nature. This magic is mostly used by druids, rangers and creatures close to nature, such as fey.


### Prepared Spells
If your class prepares spells, you can choose to not select all your daily spells. Instead you can cast a spell from your spellbook using that unprepared slot. Casting a spell this way takes a minute per spell level, requires your spellbook, and after casting, the slot is now prepared with the new spell.

The same applies to clerics, druids and paladins, who pray for a minute per spell level instead of using a spellbook. For other classes and archetypes, as a rule of thumb, if the class does not have a "spells known" column, this applies as well.


### Casting Spells
When a character casts any spell, the same basic rules are followed, regardless of the character’s class or the spell’s effects.

#### Casting Time
Most spells require an action to cast, but some spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much more time to cast.

  ***Bonus Action***. A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift. You can’t cast another spell during the same turn, except for a cantrip with a casting time of 1 action.

  ***Rection***. If a spell can be cast as a reaction, the spell description tells you exactly when you can do so.

  ***Longer Casting Times***. When casting spells with casting time longer than an action, you must spend your action each turn casting the spell, you cannot move and must maintain your concentration. If your concentration is broken, the spell fails, but you don’t expend a spell slot.



#### Components
The physical requirements you must meet in order to cast it. Each spell’s description indicates whether it requires verbal (V), somatic (S), material (M) or focus (F) components. If you can’t provide one or more of a spell’s com ponents, you are unable to cast the spell.

  ***Verbal***. Most spells require the forceful chanting of mystic words. The words themselves aren’t the source of power; rather, the particular combination of sounds, with specific pitch and resonance, sets the threads of magic in motion.

  ***Somatic***. Spellcasting gestures might include a forceful gesticulation or an intricate set of gestures. If a spell requires a somatic component, the caster must have free use of at least one hand to perform these gestures.

  ***Material***. Some spells requires particular objects, specified in parentheses in the component entry. A caster can use a component pouch or a spellcasting focus in place of an item, unless a cost is indicated. A spellcaster must have a hand free to access material components, but it can be the same hand that he or she uses to perform somatic components.

  ***Focus***. An item through which the magic of the spell is focused. This item needs to be present and held, but is not consumed.


#### Targets
To target something, you must see it, unless you are targeting yourself.


### <a class="internal-link" name="internal-spell">Identifying Spells</a>
To identify a spell, a character can use a ***reaction*** to identify it as it’s being cast or  an action to identify it by its effect after it is cast.

This is an Intelligence (Arcana) check against a DC equal to 15 + the spell’s level. If the spell is cast as a class spell and the character is a member of that class, the check is made with advantage. For example, if the spellcaster casts a spell as a cleric, another cleric has advantage on the check to identify the spell.

This Intelligence check represents the fact that identifying a spell requires a quick mind and familiarity with the theory and practice of casting. This is true even for a character whose spellcasting ability is Wisdom or Charisma. Being able to cast spells doesn’t by itself make you adept at deducing exactly what others are doing when they cast their spells.


### Wild magic
To find the result of a Wild magic effect roll a ***1d1000 + caster's Luck modifier - target's Luck modifier***.






{{}}">wide
## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-adventuring">Adventuring</a>

This chapter covers the basics of the adventuring life, from the mechanics of movement to the rules of resting and activities your character might pursue between adventures.

## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-rest">Rest</a>
Heroic though they might be, adventurers can’t spend every hour of the day in the thick of exploration and combat. They need rest — time to sleep and eat, tend their wounds, refresh their minds and spirits and brace themselves for further adventure.

There are two kinds of rests, short and long.

### Short rest
A short rest can be anything from taking a couple of minutes after a tough fight to bind your wounds, to a longer break, taking time to eat and rest.

After combat (or other event causing loss of hp) you can spend a few minutes catching your breath. This allows you to spend 1 **Hit Die** and use a **Healer's kit**.

<div class="descriptive" markdown="1">

##### Healer's kit
*(5 gp, 3 lbs)*

You can also use a Healer’s kit to bind wounds and apply simple first aid during a short rest. Make a **DC 10 Wisdom** (Medicine) check to treat a creature that was damaged within the last 10 minutes. On a success, the target can expend 1 **Hit Hie** to heal, plus 1 additional die for each 10 points you exceed the DC.

You can also, as an action, spend one use to stabilize a creature that has 0 hit points, without needing to make a Wisdom (Medicine) check.

A Healer's kit starts with a 1d10 usage die.


You can also take a longer **Short rest** if you have access to a safe place, like your camp. Resting like this allows you to eat and spend any number of **Hit Die**. A longer short rest also gives you some time to investigate a magic item, and hopefully discover how it works.




### Long rest
A **Long rest** is a period of extended downtime, at least 8 hours long, in a safe place like a camp or an inn. Before starting your rest, you gain the benefits of a **Short rest**.

A **Long rest** is usually spent sleeping, but you can perform light activity: reading, talking, eating, or standing watch. Some additional activities that you character can perform during the rest are listed <a href="#internal-longRest">HERE</a>.

If the rest is interrupted by a period of strenuous activity, like marching, fighting or similar adventuring activity, you must begin the rest again to gain any benefit from it.

You can’t benefit from more than one **Long rest** in a 24-hour period.

#### Benefits of a Long rest
You must have at least 1 hit point at the start of a **Long rest** rest to gain its benefits. Otherwise you regain 1 hp and become conscious at the end of the rest.


When you finish a **Long rest**, you gain the following benefits:

|    |   |
|:-: |:- |
| * | If you are a **full spellcaster**, regain a number of spent **spell slots** equal to your proficiency bonus. You regain your lowest spell slots first.
| * | **Other spellcasters**, regain a number of spent **spell slots** equal to half their proficiency bonus (rounded up). You regain your lowest spell slots first.
| * | Classes may have other benefits.
| * | If you have spent the entire rest close to a magical item, you attune to it.


In addition, choose ***one*** of the following benefits:

|    |   |
|:-: |:- |
| * | If not at max hit points, regain up to your **max hp/2** (round up).
| * | If not at max Hit Dice, regain up to your **max HD/2** (round up).
| * | Remove 1 **exhaustion** level.
| * | Attempt to remove a **negative condition** (ex. reduced max hp or a disease).
| * | Regain 1 reduced **ability score**.
| * | If less than 3 inspiration, regain 1 **inspiration**.
| * | Regain your lowest **spell slot**.
| * | Choose a **class specific** benefit listed in your class description.








{{}}">wide
## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-longRest">Additional Activities</a>


During a long rest, you can perform one primary activity before you sleep. Below are listed some example activities.

* Brew drinks
* Cook food
* Craft an item
* Maintain gear
* Repair an item

#### Brew Drinks
If you are proficient with alchemy or herbalism and have the right supplies, you can prepare brews for the group. This requires a campfire and an appropriate kit. Expend one of your water rations to try one of the following actions:

 **Purify water**: You distill some impure water overnight to create 1d4 + 1 new, drinkable water rations.

 **Craft**: Prepare an alchemical or herbal item if you have raw materials

#### Cook Food
If you know how to cook and have the right supplies, you can prepare a meal for the group. This requires use of a campfire and cooking tools.

#### Craft an Item
You can spend time crafting simple items — bandages, salves, arrows — if you have the right materials and tools. Roll the appropriate check for your specific craft.

#### Maintain Gear
You can spend time maintaining your weapons and armor, if you have the right knowledge, materials and tools.

<div class="descriptive" markdown="1">

##### Gear maintenance kit
*(3 gp, 1 lbs)*

This kit contains a whetstone, metal polish, conditioning oil for leather, two soft cloths, extra leather straps, a sewing needle, and a few buttons.

The skills required to make proper use of this kit depends on the type of eqipment being maintained (see below).

A Gear maintenance kit starts with a 1d8 usage die.




**Sharpen Weapon**. If you are proficient with ***martial weapons***, you can spend some time maintaining a weapon - this includes sharpening edged weapons, adjusting and maintaining balance of hammers and polearms, etc, taking care of the wear and tear put on it by adventuring and putting in peak condition.

This peak condition is represented by giving the wielder of that weapon the ability to reroll a damage die. You must use the new result after rerolling the die.

Spend a use of your gear maintenance kit and roll an Intelligence check against DC 10.
* **Success**: You successfully take care of the weapon.
* **Failure**: The weapon does not receive a bonus.

Proper tool proficiency allows you to roll a Intelligence (Tool) check instead, and on a success grant an additional number of rerolls equal to your proficiency bonus.


| Tool | Weapons |
| :--- | :------ |
| Bowyer's tools | Bows
| Leatherworker's tools | Sling
| Smith's tools | Metal weapons
| Tinker's tools | Crossbows


**Maintain Armor**. Proficiency with ***leatherworker's tools*** or ***smith's tools*** allow you to buff and repair appropriate armor, bringing it to peak condition. This peak condition is represented by giving the wearer temporary hit points equal to your proficiency bonus. These hit points last until expended.

Spend a use of your gear maintenance kit and roll an Intelligence (Tool) check against DC 10.
* **Success**: You successfully take care of the armor.
* **Failure**: The armor does not receive a bonus.

#### Repair an Item
If you're proficient with the appropriate tool, you may perform basic repairs on damaged equipment—sharpening a blunt sword, sewing up a torn robe, hammering out some dented armor. You can try to repair an item with a successful Intelligence (Tool) check against DC 10.
* **Success**: You successfully repair the item.
* **Failure**: You were unable to make the repairs.






{{}}">wide
## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-travel">Travel</a>

It is rarely straightforward outside city walls. Many adventurers have lost their way in dark forests. Many more have died from lack of food, or water, or protection from bandits and monsters—the world is not forgiving to the unprepared traveler. This section introduces the journey phase to make travel a more integral part of the adventure.

If you wish to make a journey, there are some basic steps to follow: plan your route and gather supplies, travel the distance and arrive at your destination.


### Planning a Journey
The first step in making a journey is planning — you need to decide where you're going, how you're getting there and gather any supplies, vehicles and equipment needed for the journey.

#### Food
A character needs ***one pound of food per day*** and can go without food for a number of days equal to 3 + Constitution modifier (min 1). At the end of each day beyond that limit, a character automatically suffers one level of exhaustion. A normal day of eating resets the count of days without food to zero.


#### Water
Unless a character drinks ***one gallon of water per day***, or two gallons if the weather is hot, he  must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or suffer one level of exhaustion at the end of the day. A character drinking less than half that, automatically suffers one level of exhaustion at the end of the day. If the character already has one or more levels of exhaustion, the character takes two levels in either case.


### Travel Day
Each travel day is broken up into distinct phases — breaking camp, travel, setting camp and rest.


#### Breaking Camp
Sunlight crests the horizon. It's time to wake up, eat some breakfast to prepare for the day ahead, and pack up camp.

 **Check the weather**: The weather can have a drastic impact on your travel plans, especially if you're not prepared. You may want to avoid travel completely during heavy rains, storms, and snows.




 **Assign roles**: Decide who is going to be today's guide, forager and lookout. A character can only assume one role at a time.

 **Set pace**: Decide what pace you'll be travelling at today — slow, medium, or fast. A slower pace makes it easier to succeed at your roles, but also means that the journey takes longer to complete.

 **Pack up camp**: Put out any cooking fires, strap on your gear, and pack up your camp.


#### Travel Pace
While traveling, a group can move at a ***normal, fast or slow pace***, as shown on the Travelling Pace table. The table states how far the party can move in a period of time and the impact a pace has to a role. A fast pace makes characters less perceptive, while a slow pace makes it possible to sneak around and to search an area more carefully.


#### Walking
The average character has a walking speed of about 2 miles per hour, and can travel comfortably around 16 miles per day. This takes into account the many rest breaks, pauses, and distractions a character will need during the day — especially those that carry heavy gear and armor. Walking long-distance is surprisingly hard work, and a long march in full plate armor is a sure way to strain muscles and hurt yourself.


#### Forced March
The Travelling Pace table assumes that characters ***travel for 8 hours in day***. For each additional hour of travel beyond 8 hours, the characters cover the distance shown in the hour column for their pace, and must make a Constitution saving throw at the end of the hour. The DC is 10 + 1 for each hour past 8 hours. On a failed saving throw, a character suffers one level of exhaustion


#### Mounts and Vehicles
The average horse walks at much the same pace as a character. While they can gallop much faster, they can only do so on flat ground for very short periods — horses overheat very quickly.

Characters in wagons, carriages, or other land vehicles choose a pace as normal. Characters in a waterborne vessel are limited to the speed of the vessel, but don’t suffer penalties for a fast pace or gain benefits from a slow pace.

{{}}">sTable,wide
#### Travelling Pace
| | Distance per... || |||||
| Travel pace | Hour | Day | Guide | Forage | Scout | Hide Tracks | Effect |
|:------------|:----:|:---:|:-----:|:------:|:-----:|:-----------:|:-------|
| Slow | 1.5&nbsp;miles | 12&nbsp;miles | Advantage | Normal | Advantage | Advantage | -5 penalty to Perception
| Medium | 2&nbsp;miles | 16&nbsp;miles | Normal | Disadvantage | Normal | Normal | —
| Fast | 3&nbsp;miles | 24&nbsp;miles | Disadvantage | None | Disadvantage | Disadvantage | Able to use stealth








#### Setting Camp
The sun sinks beneath the horizon and the sky darkens. It's time to set up camp for the night, eat and reflect on today's travel.

 **Guide**: The guide makes a guidance check to see if you managed to stay on the right path.

 **Forage**: The forager makes a foraging check to see if they gathered any food or water supplies throughout the day's travel.

 **Make camp**: Take off your gear and set up camp.


#### Rest
The night is dark and full of terrors, an unwelcoming to travelers. Travel is very difficult and it's easy to get lost, so get some sleep and recover your energy for tomorrow. See the section about what happens during <a href="#internal-rest">Resting</a> and <a href="#longRest">Activities</a> you can perform during the long rest.


### Roles During Travel
There are three main responsibilities when travelling: guide, forager and lookout. A person can only lead or assist one role per day, and any role not taken will automatically fail any related rolls.

A role can have only one leader, but any number of helpers. The leader makes the roll, the first helper grants advantage, and subsequent helpers grant a +1 bonus.


#### The Guide
The guide makes sure everyone is heading in the right direction and avoids obstacles. If the guide fails, the journey will take longer.

When setting camp the guide rolls an Intelligence check using the DCs on the Guidance table. Cartography tools and the Survival skill will help you be a better guide.

 ***Success***: The party is on track. Subtract today's progress from the remaining travel time.

 ***Failure***: You veered off course or had to take a detour around an obstacle. Subtract half of the normal progress from the remaining travel time.

 ***Failure by more than 5*** : No progress today. You either got lost or had to take a long way around.


#### Guidance
| DC | Terrain
|:----:|:-------------|
| **5** | Wide open plains; Clear landmarks; Obvious pathway.
| **10** | Tall landmarks; Small hills.
| **15** | Light rain or mist; Woods and hills.
| **20** | Moonlight night; Heavy rain or mist; Forest with no clear pathway or markings.
| **25** | Fog; Thick and obscure forest; Mountains.
| **30** &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Clouded night; Impossibly thick fog; A shifting maze; Magically treacherous terrain.




#### The Forager
The forager finds food and water for the travelling party. If the forager fails, you can run out of essential supplies long before the journey reaches its destination — so make sure to pack plentiful supplies before you embark if you don't have a skilled forager.

Roll an Wisdom check using the DCs on the Foraging table at the end of the day to see how much food and water you were able to hunt throughout the day. Hunting equipment and the Survival skill will help you forage.

 ***Success***: You recover 2d4 rations worth of food and water you can divide this however you like.

 ***Failure***: You were unable to find anything.


#### Foraging
| DC | Terrain
|:----:|:-------------|
| **5** | Lush and verdant forest; Food and water are everywhere.
| **10** | Forest; Coast; Abundant food and clean water.
| **15** | Thin woodland and greenwood. Food must be actively hunted and water is harder to find.
| **20** | Dry, open plains; Very little food or clean water.
| **25** | Desert and barren or polluted land; Food is extremely rare and water may need treatment.
| **30** &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Toxic or corrupted deadlands; Food is inedible and water sources are poisoned.


Additionally a character can forage for herbs. See the section for <a href="https://homebrewery.naturalcrit.com/print/1Jm5srkDwjuW6p_SI8uQqnu1htq9jFNF1VKmVI6DuZdSU">Herbalism</a> for how that works.

#### The Lookout
The lookout ranges ahead during the day's travel and keeps an eye out for dangers. If the lookout fails, you may be ambushed by enemies and other hazards.

If you are the lookout, you're responsible for making any perception checks during the day to spot incoming risks and dangers.

 **Success**: You noticed the threat and were able to warn the party in time. You have a chance to avoid the threat entirely, or encounter it at your own pace.

 **Failure**: You failed to spot the danger in time and the party are surprised.









{{}}">wide
## <a class="internal-link" name="internal-water">Water rules</a>

Specific rules for what happens in and on water. Unless otherwise noted all ability checks mentioned in this section benefit from proficiency with swimming.

***Rough water*** adds 5 to all the following DCs except for saves made when more than 5 feet under the surface.


### Falling Off a Ship
This can be hazardous to your health. If you fall or are pushed overboard, you must succeed on a ***DC 10 Dexterity check*** to enter the water without damage. Otherwise you receive 1d6 hit points damage from the fall.

  If you fall overboard you will splash down 1d6+5 ft from your ship.

 If you are pushed overboard you will fall 2d6+5 ft from your ship.

 If you jump or dive into the water you can enter the water at any point up to the maximum distance you can jump.


#### Climbing back on a Ship
If within 5 ft of a moving ship, you must make a ***DC 10 Strength check***. Failure means that you cannot move this round, you are using all of your strength to simply keep your head above the waves. Once you reach the ship, you must make as ***DC 15 Strength (Climb)*** check to climb back onto the ship. Failure results in you falling back into the water.


### Underwater
You can swim underwater as long as you can hold your breath (see “Drowning” below). Your underwater swimming speed is the same as your surface swimming speed. You can swim straight down at half that speed. You can swim straight down at 15 ft per round if holding the equivalent of medium armor or 25 ft per round if holding the equivalent of heavy armor.

Without armor you can swim toward the surface at a rate of 20 ft per round.


### Armor
In general, heavy armor is not common on ships. The weight tends to be the most prohibitive factor – falling overboard in full plate normally results in death. Occasionally, soldiers will don light or medium armor for a battle, but most of the time sailors go unarmored.

The time it takes to remove armor when in water is halved with a successful ***DC 15 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check***.




#### Light Armor
Attempting to swim while wearing light armor requires a ***DC 10 Strength check each round***. Failure means you have a speed of 0 as you go under water for that round and lose one held item, shield or weapon (your choice as to what you drop).

Removing your armor after entering the water takes one minute (10 rounds). During this time you cannot swim or take any other actions. Make a ***DC 10 Dexterity check*** each round. Each successful round keeps your head above water and counts as one round of the rounds required to remove your armor. Failure means that you went under water this round and made no headway in removing your armor. After 3 failures you receive one level of exhaustion.

#### Medium Armor
Swimming in medium armor requires a ***DC 15 Strength check*** each round. On a success, if you are on the surface at the beginning of the round, you stay on the surface. Each foot you swim cost you ***two extra feet*** of speed, and you can take no other actions besides shouting and stowing a weapon. Failure means you sink 10 ft and lose any still-carried shields or weapons. On the round following a failed save you are under water. After that, on a successful save you can swim toward the surface at a rate of 15 ft per round. On failure you sink another 10 ft.

You can attempt to remove your armor, but you will be sinking at a rate of 10 ft per round during this time. It normally takes 5 minutes (50 rounds) to doff your armor.

#### Heavy Armor
You cannot swim while wearing heavy armor, giving you an effective speed of 0. Whenever you are in water, you lose any carried shields and weapons and begin to sink. Make a ***DC 25 Strength check*** each round. Success keeps your head above water, or if you start the round under water you can swim 15 ft toward the surface. You can take no other actions. Failure means you sink another 20 ft.

You can attempt to remove your armor, but you will be sinking at a rate of 20 ft per round during this time. It normally takes 5 minutes (50 rounds) to doff your armor.

### Drowning
After 1 + your Constitution bonus minutes of holding your breath underwater you fall unconscious, your hit points fall to 0, and you begin making your death saving throws as per the standard rules.

However, if you become stable there is a problem. If you are still under water you can’t remain stable. So you must start making death saving throws again. This continues until you die unless you are saved in some way.






